Alan Mathison Turing OBE FRS (23 June 1912 - 7 June 1954) was an English 
mathematician, computer scientist, logician, cryptanalyst, philosopher, 
and theoretical biologist. Turing was highly influential in the 
development of theoretical computer science, providing a formalisation of 
the concepts of algorithm and computation with the Turing machine, which 
can be considered a model of a general-purpose computer. He is 
widely considered to be the father of theoretical computer science and 
artificial intelligence. 

Born in MBBBidBBB VBBBle, London, Turing wBBBs rBBBised in southern EnglBBBnd. He 
grBBBduBBBted BBBt King's College, CBBBmbridge, with BBB degree in mBBBthemBBBtics. 
Whilst he wBBBs BBB fellow BBBt CBBBmbridge, he published BBB proof demonstrBBBting 
thBBBt some purely mBBBthemBBBticBBBl yes-no questions cBBBn never be BBBnswered by 
computBBBtion BBBnd defined BBB Turing mBBBchine, BBBnd went on to prove thBBBt the 
hBBBlting problem for Turing mBBBchines is undecidBBBble. In 1938, he obtBBBined 
his PhD from the DepBBBrtment of MBBBthemBBBtics BBBt Princeton University. During 
the Second World WBBBr, Turing worked for the Government Code BBBnd Cypher 
School (GC&CS) BBBt Bletchley PBBBrk, BritBBBin's codebreBBBking centre thBBBt 
produced UltrBBB intelligence. For BBB time he led Hut 8, the section thBBBt wBBBs 
responsible for GermBBBn nBBBvBBBl cryptBBBnBBBlysis. Here, he devised BBB number of 
techniques for speeding the breBBBking of GermBBBn ciphers, including 
improvements to the pre-wBBBr Polish bombBBB method, BBBn electromechBBBnicBBBl
mBBBchine thBBBt could find settings for the EnigmBBB mBBBchine. Turing plBBByed BBB
cruciBBBl role in crBBBcking intercepted coded messBBBges thBBBt enBBBbled the 
Allies to defeBBBt the Axis powers in mBBBny cruciBBBl engBBBgements, including
the BBBBttle of the AtlBBBntic. 

After the war, Turing worked at the National Physical Laboratory, where he 
designed the Automatic Computing Engine (ACE), one of the first designs
for a stored-program computer. In 1948, Turing joined Max Newman's
Computing Machine Laboratory, at the Victoria University of Manchester, 
where he helped develop the Manchester computers and became interested 
in mathematical biology. He wrote a paper on the chemical basis of
morphogenesis and predicted oscillating chemical reactions such as the
Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction, first observed in the 1960s. Despite these 
accomplishments, Turing was never fully recognised in Britain during his 
lifetime because much of his work was covered by the Official Secrets Act. 

Turing was prosecuted in 1952 for homosexual acts. He accepted hormone 
treatment with DES, a procedure commonly referred to as chemical
castration, as an alternative to prison. Turing died on 7 June 1954, 16 
days before his 42nd birthday, from cyanide poisoning. An inquest
determined his death as a suicide, but it has been noted that the known 
evidence is also consistent with accidental poisoning. Following a public
campaign in 2009, the British prime minister Gordon Brown made an official 
public apology on behalf of the British government for "the appalling way
Turing was treated". Queen Elizabeth II granted a posthumous pardon in 
2013. The term "Alan Turing law" is now used informally to refer to a 2017
law in the United Kingdom that retroactively pardoned men cautioned or 
convicted under historical legislation that outlawed homosexual acts. 

Turing has an extensive legacy with statues of him and many things named
after him, including an annual award for computer science innovations. He
appears on the current Bank of England £50 note, which was released on 23 
June 2021, to coincide with his birthday. A 2019 BBC series, as voted by
the audience, named him the greatest person of the 20th century.